# Data Ethics
### By Naomi Norgard

In an increasingly technologically reliant society, it is imperative that the morality of data practices of large and developing corporations have their users in mind. Technology is only going to become a more integral part of everyday life, so new mechanization techniques, social networking sites, and a myriad of other creations should keep in mind that humanity will work to adapt to the influx of change. With our nervous systems still wired for the ancient world, different forms of outside stimulus have been proven to be addictive while others have been found to be detrimental to both physical and mental health in other ways. Because of this, I believe that any ind of software company should have a set of rules in place while developing their products in order to safeguard the general public from a multitude of issues.
For example, large corporations such as Meta, Google, Snap Limited, and others have been shown and called into question for their work. These sites are just now having to change practices that could have been avoided in the first place. Algorithms at Meta and Snap especially have been shown to encourage activity in their platforms. This leads to severe mental effects and the ripple has been felt across the globe. The first iPhone was introduced only in the early 2000s and even a decade ago, it was an enormous part of the professional and social scenes. Now, everything is at your fingertips. The question then is how can we ensure that we won’t find ourselves being puppeteered for profit? Many exposes have been released recently and are working to make this issue more widely understood. 
Understanding the issue is only the first step in solving the problem, though. This could be remedied with strict guidelines and testing requirements by federal or state government. The FDA regulates food and drugs that we consume, so why isn’t there something similar for the media we consume as well? Data privacy laws as of right now are limited and don’t restrict the freedoms of companies very much. This means that consumers are at high risk of being exploited, and they are. The lack of data privacy means that websites and apps are selling information to third party platforms that redistribute that information and use it to cater things more towards your liking. An example of this is personalized ads. These come from trends in your interests, demographic data, and behaviors. 
It doesn’t just stop there. The lack of online privacy can even lead to identity theft. While this is a whole other sphere of law - privacy - this is also a very important part of life. Emails, passwords, registration, social security, and other personal facets of information can be used against you and sold by things you are using. This is yet another area where a regulatory body would benefit the safety of the public. 
There are undoubtedly many more reasons why data ethics should be taken seriously and protected more. Holding software companies to higher standards seems like a good start for ensuring the protection of people in this day in age.
